packages/coding-agent/src/prompts/tools/task.md, before:

Launch a new agent to handle complex, multi-step tasks autonomously.

The Task tool launches specialized agents (workers) that autonomously handle complex tasks. Each agent type has specific capabilities and tools available to it.

**CRITICAL: Subagents have NO access to conversation history.** They only see:
1. Their agent-specific system prompt
2. The `context` string you provide
3. The `task` string you provide

If you discussed requirements, plans, schemas, or decisions with the user, you MUST include that information in `context`. Subagents cannot see prior messages - they start fresh with only what you explicitly pass them.

## Available Agents

{{#list agents prefix="- " join="\n"}}
{{name}}: {{description}} (Tools: {{default (join tools ", ") "All tools"}}{{#if output}}, Output: structured{{/if}})
{{/list}}
{{#if moreAgents}}
  ...and {{moreAgents}} more agents
{{/if}}

Agents with "Output: structured" have a fixed schema enforced via frontmatter; your `output` parameter will be ignored for these agents.

## When NOT to Use

- Reading a specific file path → Use Read tool instead
- Finding files by pattern/name → Use Find tool instead
- Searching for a specific class/function definition → Use Grep tool instead
- Searching code within 2-3 specific files → Use Read tool instead
- Tasks unrelated to the agent descriptions above

## Usage Notes

- Always include a short description of the task in the task parameter
- **Plan-then-execute**: Put shared constraints in `context`, keep each task focused, specify acceptance criteria; use `output` when you need structured output
- **Minimize tool chatter**: Avoid repeating large context; use Output tool with output ids for full logs
- **Structured completion**: If `output` is provided, subagents must call `complete` to finish
- **Parallelize**: Launch multiple agents concurrently whenever possible
- **Isolate file scopes**: Assign each task distinct files or directories so agents don't conflict
- **Results are intermediate data**: Agent findings provide context for YOU to perform actual work. Do not treat agent reports as "task complete" signals.
- **Stateless invocations**: Subagents have zero memory of your conversation. Pass ALL relevant context: requirements discussed, decisions made, schemas agreed upon, file paths mentioned. If you reference something from earlier discussion without including it, the subagent will fail.
- **Trust outputs**: Agent results should generally be trusted
- **Clarify intent**: Tell the agent whether you expect code changes or just research (search, file reads, web fetches)
- **Proactive use**: If an agent description says to use it proactively, do so without waiting for explicit user request

## Parameters

- `agent`: Agent type to use for all tasks
- `context`: **Required context from conversation** - include ALL relevant info: requirements, schemas, decisions, constraints. Subagents cannot see chat history.
- `model`: (optional) Model override (fuzzy matching, e.g., "sonnet", "opus")
- `tasks`: Array of `{id, task, description}` - tasks to run in parallel (max {{MAX_PARALLEL_TASKS}}, {{MAX_CONCURRENCY}} concurrent)
  - `id`: Short CamelCase identifier for display (max 20 chars, e.g., "SessionStore", "LspRefactor")
  - `task`: The task prompt for the agent
  - `description`: Short human-readable description of what the task does
- `output`: (optional) JTD schema for structured subagent output (used by the complete tool)

## Example

<example>
user: "Looks good, execute the plan"
assistant: I'll execute the refactoring plan.
assistant: Uses the Task tool:
{
  "agent": "task",
  "context": "Refactoring the auth module into separate concerns.\n\nPlan:\n1. AuthProvider - Extract React context and provider from src/auth/index.tsx\n2. AuthApi - Extract API calls to src/auth/api.ts, use existing fetchJson helper\n3. AuthTypes - Move types to src/auth/types.ts, re-export from index\n\nConstraints:\n- Preserve all existing exports from src/auth/index.tsx\n- Use project's fetchJson (src/utils/http.ts), don't use raw fetch\n- No new dependencies",
  "output": {
    "properties": {
      "summary": { "type": "string" },
      "decisions": { "elements": { "type": "string" } },
      "concerns": { "elements": { "type": "string" } }
    }
  },
  "tasks": [
    { "id": "AuthProvider", "task": "Execute step 1: Extract AuthProvider and AuthContext", "description": "Extract React context" },
    { "id": "AuthApi", "task": "Execute step 2: Extract API calls to api.ts", "description": "Extract API layer" },
    { "id": "AuthTypes", "task": "Execute step 3: Move types to types.ts", "description": "Extract types" }
  ]
}
</example>

Key points:
- **Plan in context**: The full plan is written once; each task references its step without repeating shared constraints
- **Parallel execution**: 3 agents run concurrently, each owning one step - no duplicated work
- **Structured output**: JTD schema ensures consistent reporting across all agents

Commit message:

refactor(ai): updated User-Agent header to 'pi' and simplified Codex prompts
- Updated User-Agent header from 'opencode' to 'pi' for OpenAI Codex requests.
- Simplified Codex system prompt instructions and removed bridge text override.
- Removed bridge text parameter from buildCodexSystemPrompt function.
- Updated task execution guidelines with parallelization instructions.

packages/coding-agent/src/prompts/tools/task.md, after:

Launch a new agent to handle complex, multi-step tasks autonomously.

The Task tool launches specialized agents (workers) that autonomously handle complex tasks. Each agent type has specific capabilities and tools available to it.

**CRITICAL: Subagents have NO access to conversation history.** They only see:
1. Their agent-specific system prompt
2. The `context` string you provide
3. The `task` string you provide

If you discussed requirements, plans, schemas, or decisions with the user, you MUST include that information in `context`. Subagents cannot see prior messages - they start fresh with only what you explicitly pass them.

## Available Agents

{{#list agents prefix="- " join="\n"}}
{{name}}: {{description}} (Tools: {{default (join tools ", ") "All tools"}}{{#if output}}, Output: structured{{/if}})
{{/list}}
{{#if moreAgents}}
  ...and {{moreAgents}} more agents
{{/if}}

Agents with "Output: structured" have a fixed schema enforced via frontmatter; your `output` parameter will be ignored for these agents.

## When NOT to Use

- Reading a specific file path → Use Read tool instead
- Finding files by pattern/name → Use Find tool instead
- Searching for a specific class/function definition → Use Grep tool instead
- Searching code within 2-3 specific files → Use Read tool instead
- Tasks unrelated to the agent descriptions above

## Usage Notes

- Always include a short description of the task in the task parameter
- **Plan-then-execute**: Put shared constraints in `context`, keep each task focused, specify acceptance criteria; use `output` when you need structured output
- **Ask open-ended questions**: For exploration tasks, frame prompts to elicit factual discovery, not confirmation. Avoid yes/no questions that are easy to hallucinate.
  - Bad: "Is there rate limiting?" or "Does the API validate tokens?" → Binary answers invite hallucination
  - Good: "Find and describe how rate limiting is implemented" or "How does the API handle token validation?" → Forces investigation and factual reporting
  - The subagent should report *what exists*, then YOU verify if it meets requirements
- **Minimize tool chatter**: Avoid repeating large context; use Output tool with output ids for full logs
- **Structured completion**: If `output` is provided, subagents must call `complete` to finish
- **Parallelize**: Launch multiple agents whenever possible. You MUST use a single Task call with multiple entries in the `tasks` array to do this.
- **Isolate file scopes**: Assign each task distinct files or directories so agents don't conflict
- **Results are intermediate data**: Agent findings provide context for YOU to perform actual work. Do not treat agent reports as "task complete" signals.
- **Stateless invocations**: Subagents have zero memory of your conversation. Pass ALL relevant context: requirements discussed, decisions made, schemas agreed upon, file paths mentioned. If you reference something from earlier discussion without including it, the subagent will fail.
- **Trust outputs**: Agent results should generally be trusted
- **Clarify intent**: Tell the agent whether you expect code changes or just research (search, file reads, web fetches)
- **Proactive use**: If an agent description says to use it proactively, do so without waiting for explicit user request

## Parameters

- `agent`: Agent type to use for all tasks
- `context`: **Required context from conversation** - include ALL relevant info: requirements, schemas, decisions, constraints. Subagents cannot see chat history.
- `model`: (optional) Model override (fuzzy matching, e.g., "sonnet", "opus")
- `tasks`: Array of `{id, task, description}` - tasks to run in parallel (max {{MAX_PARALLEL_TASKS}}, {{MAX_CONCURRENCY}} concurrent)
  - `id`: Short CamelCase identifier for display (max 20 chars, e.g., "SessionStore", "LspRefactor")
  - `task`: The task prompt for the agent
  - `description`: Short human-readable description of what the task does
- `output`: (optional) JTD schema for structured subagent output (used by the complete tool)

## Example

<example>
user: "Looks good, execute the plan"
assistant: I'll execute the refactoring plan.
assistant: Uses the Task tool:
{
  "agent": "task",
  "context": "Refactoring the auth module into separate concerns.\n\nPlan:\n1. AuthProvider - Extract React context and provider from src/auth/index.tsx\n2. AuthApi - Extract API calls to src/auth/api.ts, use existing fetchJson helper\n3. AuthTypes - Move types to src/auth/types.ts, re-export from index\n\nConstraints:\n- Preserve all existing exports from src/auth/index.tsx\n- Use project's fetchJson (src/utils/http.ts), don't use raw fetch\n- No new dependencies",
  "output": {
    "properties": {
      "summary": { "type": "string" },
      "decisions": { "elements": { "type": "string" } },
      "concerns": { "elements": { "type": "string" } }
    }
  },
  "tasks": [
    { "id": "AuthProvider", "task": "Execute step 1: Extract AuthProvider and AuthContext", "description": "Extract React context" },
    { "id": "AuthApi", "task": "Execute step 2: Extract API calls to api.ts", "description": "Extract API layer" },
    { "id": "AuthTypes", "task": "Execute step 3: Move types to types.ts", "description": "Extract types" }
  ]
}
</example>

Key points:
- **Plan in context**: The full plan is written once; each task references its step without repeating shared constraints
- **Parallel execution**: 3 agents run concurrently, each owning one step - no duplicated work
- **Structured output**: JTD schema ensures consistent reporting across all agents
